---
layout: post
title:  Lightweight File-based Wiki
date:   2016-06-09 17:25 +0800
tags: python, projects
---

While creating my own toy language using LLVM is more of a long term
educational project, recently I've been working towards something else
entirely.

After playing around with Jekyll a bit and really liking how you can easily
create websites by writing the pages in markdown and getting a rendering engine
to turn it into HTML, I was wondering how difficult it'd be to do something
similar, but dynamically. I mean, it's not hard to use the markdown package to
convert markdown files into HTML, flask makes creating web apps and routing a
piece of cake, and one of Python's most powerful features is it's ability to
manipulate files. Plus there are libraries for working with git repositories, 
and git would be perfect for keeping track of a continually changing website.
How hard can it be?

Turns out, it's actually not that hard. 

First off I made a simple `Page` object that will represent any arbitrary page
on the wiki. I decided that I like Jekyll's way of putting a metadata section 
at the start of a file, so the `Page` will have one as well. It's also
convenient to have methods that will generate a format suitable for saving to
disk, as well as something to turn the content from markdown to HTML so we can
view it. Most of this stuff is just run-of-the-mill Python, nothing special.
Although creating a parser that would identify legitimate pages and parse the
text saved to disk back into a `Page` object was a bit more complex,
conceptually.

Next thing to do is set up a simple Flask web app and make a route that will
accept any arbitrary path and map that to some location on disk. Then that
route needs to check whether it's a valid location and render the appropriate
template. All up, the route itself isn't too hard, I think it took a dozen or
so lines as well as one or two calls to utility functions that check if a
filename is valid.

So now we have a web app that can actually read files from disk and render them
in your browser. Throughout this entire process I was writing tests and aiming
to keep the code coverage above 90%. Given how complex the Flask app's
configuration process turned out to be (we need to allow the end user to change
settings easily), I'm pretty happy about how it's turned out so far.

Now that we can navigate to an arbitrary url and, given a corresponding file
exists, view it's contents in the browser, we need to have some sort of way to
find all these pages. 

It'd be really nice to have an index page. Something with an output similar to
the Linux `tree` command would be nice, except in dot-point form, and
preferably with nesting to indicate which pages have children.

After a bit of googling I found quite a few implementations of `tree` in
python, many just iterating through `os.walk()` and printing the result, but
none really give a format that's convenient for passing to a template and
rendering as a nested dot-point list. So I decided to just roll my own. 

Considering how often I use `tree`, and how simple the problem appears on the
surface, creating a properly nested structure by iterating through the
filesystem is a massive pain. Instead of the original `for` loop and
`os.walk()` implementation I started off with, I decided to use a something
I've done a fair amount of work on in my study of compilers, lexers and
parsers. Recursion and tree datastructures. 

It turned out to be pretty trivial to create a `TreeNode` class which you could
call `add_children()` on and it would create new nodes for each file/folder in
a specific directory, and then recursively call `add_children()` on all the
folders. Likewise, creating a templating macro that would create the desired
nested structure recursively was a bit of a tricky thing to get my head around.
For the sake of posterity, here's the macro I was using to create the nested
list.

    {% macro format_node(tree_node) %}
    <li>
        <a href="/wiki/{{ tree_node.location() }}">{{ tree_node.name() }}</a>
    </li>
    {% if tree_node.children %}
        <ul>
        {% for child in tree_node.children %}
            {% if not child.is_index() %}
            {{ format_node(child) }}
            {% endif %}
        {% endfor %}
        </ul>
    {% endif %}
    {% endmacro %}

So now we've effectively got a read-only wiki. You can still create pages in
your editor by going to the wiki's `_site` directory and editing pages
manually, but that's pretty error prone and I've set things so that if a page
doesn't parse correctly (the file wasn't formatted right), then you get a 500
error. 

So next up is giving our wiki the power to edit and create pages. Along with
those editing powers, we'll also need to use the `Page.commit()` method created
earlier so that whenever a change is made there's a corresponding commit in the
wiki's git repository.

All the code is hosted on [Github][wiki_repo], and I'm up to around tag
`0.2.2`. Hopefully I'll be able to turn this into a fully fledged project, it'd
be really neat to have your own wiki that you can run on either your home
computer or some old box sitting in the cupboard. Then you can use that to
store all of your documentation, notes and other things without leaving it all
in the hands of some third party like Google or Dropbox. Plus having every page
as a simple markdown file sitting in your filesystem would be pretty convenient
in terms of backing stuff up and migrating to another system.


[wiki_repo]: https://github.com/Michael-F-Bryan/mini_wiki
